# Getting Started

This repo contains the configurations for running our Moodle environments in Docker,
as well as convenience scripts for handling backups, restores, upgrades, and more.

## Requirements

You will need [git](https://git-scm.com) and [Node.js](https://nodejs.org)
{{ nodeVersion }}, preferably managed with [nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm#intro).

On Windows systems, you should run this project from WSL, since its target environment is
Linux. It will be more convenient if you run all `mdl` commands from the terminal as the
superuser by running `sudo su`.

You also may need to enable symlinks in your Git configuration for the docker-compose
files to appear properly in the individual environment directories:

```sh
git config --global core.symlinks true
```

On server and WSL environments, you may run into this git message that stems from the fact
that the environment repositories may be owned by one user but then access by root:

```text
fatal: detected dubious ownership in repository at '<path to the repository>'
To add an exception for this directory, call:
git config --add safe.directory <path to the repository>
```

It is safe and recommended to execute the command to not get these warnings. For instance:

```sh
git config --add safe.directory /var/moodle/environments/mymoodle/src
```

Checkout the repo and install dependencies:

```sh
git clone git@github.com:uicpharm/moodle.git
cd moodle
nvm use
npm install
```

The tooling is now ready for you to migrate a Moodle environment into it! For more
advanced tips on setting up your developer environment, see
[Development Tips](./development.md).

## Migrate a server

To get started, you must migrate the existing environment to your development workstation.
View the [migration](./migration.md) docs for instructions.

::: danger **IMPORTANT:** Check your `.env` file

It is critical to check your `.env` file (i.e. `environments/mymoodle/.env`) for your
environment *before* restoring the environment. This file is automatically generated with
minimal settings if it doesn't yet exist when performing operations that need it, like
backup, restore, and start operations. This includes generating randomized passwords.

However, a production environment will obviously be configured to point to the production
instance of CPE Monitor. It's important on your local workstation to add CPE Monitor
configurations that point to the *test* instance of CPE Monitor so that when you restore
the environment to your local workstation, the restore updates the configs, so you don't
unintentionally submit records to CPE Monitor while developing.

```sh
CPE_MONITOR_WEBSERVICE_URL=https://cpemonitortest.acpe-accredit.org/service/CPEMonitorService.asmx/
CPE_MONITOR_USERNAME=t_acpe016ws
CPE_MONITOR_PASSWORD=password-is-in-last-pass
```

:::

## Installing as a Service on Servers

If your server is running Docker, just starting the environment (i.e.
`mdl start mymoodle`) is sufficient. Docker will restart containers if they crash, or
after a system reboot.

If your server is running Podman, the containers will not automatically restart on a
reboot unless you install them as a service. The [docker-host][docker-host] project
provides a `podman-install-service` script to simplify this process for our needs:

```bash
mdl start mymoodle
podman-install-service mymoodle
```

At that point, it can be controlled via `systemctl`, so you can issue commands like
`systemctl stop mymoodle` or `systemctl start mymoodle`, etc. You can continue to use our
helper commands like `mdl start`, `mdl status`, `mdl stop`, etc without conflicting with
the service.

[docker-host]: https://github.com/uicpharm/docker-host#readme

## Install Custom Plugins

To install the new CPE Monitor plugin, and any other future plugins, on the current
instance of Moodle (mymoodle), we must remove the previous core code modifications and
install the new customizations, then migrate our data and configurations into the new
plugin fields. Thankfully, this is all handled with the
[mdl install-customizations](./scripts.md#mdl-install-customizations) script, along with
the migration scripts in the `customizations` directory.

With your current instance ready (either started or not), just run:

```sh
mdl install-customizations mymoodle
```

## Scheduled Tasks

If you are setting up a server for the first time, you may want to configure some
scheduled tasks on the host system. Refer to the [Scheduled Tasks](./schedtasks.md) page
for details.

## Upgrade a Moodle environment

After successfully migrating to a containerized setup, you can begin the process of
upgrading the environment.

This should be done progressively, as certain version levels have minimum versions they
can upgrade from. Please reference the [Releases](https://moodledev.io/general/releases)
page, showing that LTS versions  4.1 (11/28/2022 to 12/8/2025) and 4.5 (10/7/2024 to
10/6/2027) are the currently-supported LTS versions. Past LTS versions were 3.5 and 3.9.
Here are the recommended upgrade milestones:

[3.5.x](https://moodledev.io/general/releases/3.5) :heavy_check_mark:

   - Support ended 5/10/2021

   ⇩

[3.9.x](https://moodledev.io/general/releases/3.9) :heavy_check_mark:

   - Support ended 12/11/2023
   - Our upgrade notes:
     [Upgrade to Moodle 3.9.x](https://github.com/uicpharm/moodle/issues/60)

   ⇩

[4.1.x](https://moodledev.io/general/releases/4.1) **:point_left: We are here**

   - LTS 11/28/2022 to 12/8/2025
   - Our upgrade notes:
     [Upgrade to Moodle 4.1.x](https://github.com/uicpharm/moodle/issues/70)

   ⇩

[4.5.x](https://moodledev.io/general/releases/4.5)

   - LTS 10/7/2024 to 10/6/2027
   - Our upgrade notes:
     [Upgrade to Moodle 4.5.x](https://github.com/uicpharm/moodle/issues/71)

   ⇩

[5.3.x](https://moodledev.io/general/releases/5.3)

   - LTS 10/5/2026 to 10/8/2029
   - Our upgrade notes:
     [Upgrade to Moodle 5.3.x](https://github.com/uicpharm/moodle/issues/113)

Normally, Moodle environments can be upgraded while active, and just put in maintenance
mode. However, since certain upgrade milestones require updating the Docker environment
(to provide newer database or PHP versions, or other factors), it is recommended to
always stop the environment, do the upgrade, and start up the environment again. When
the start script starts the environment, it will automatically use the newer Docker
Compose configuration, if required.

Each step of the way, you should:

1. Stop the environment: `mdl stop`
2. Upgrade the environment to the desired version: `mdl upgrade`
3. Start the environment and wait for database upgrades: `mdl start`
4. Upgrade plugins/theme in site admin at
   **Plugins** -> **Plugins Overview** (/admin/plugins.php)
5. Purge cache in site admin at
   **Development** -> **Purge Caches** (/admin/purgecaches.php)
6. Repeat until you are at the desired version

## Backup/Restore Behavior Considerations

The `mdl backup` script always back up to the local `backups` directory unless you
specify an alternate destination. Correspondingly, the `mdl restore` script only restores
backup sets that exist in the `backups` directory.

Backup sets always consist of three files: An archive of the source code directory
(`src`), an archive of the Moodle data directory (`data`), and MySQL dump file of the
Moodle database.

Backup files have the naming convention: `mname_label_type.ext.bz2`. For instance:

   - `mymoodle_20230726_data.tar.bz2`
   - `mymoodle_20230726_db.sql.bz2`
   - `mymoodle_20230726_src.tar.bz2`

The restore does not literally restore the database; rather, it copies the MySQL dump to
a `backup.sql` file in the environment. The Docker Compose configuration is set to point
to this file to auto-run as
[initialization the first time the container starts up][mariadb_init_new_instance].
It is intelligent enough to not run the SQL file again on future startups unless the file
changes.

***Note for development use only:*** For more rapid database restores, the
`mdl fast-db-backup` and `mdl fast-db-restore` scripts will backup and restore the raw
database files, which is much faster, but unsafe for production use.

## Refreshing a Development/Staging Server

To refresh your local development workstation or a staging server with the latest
production data, you have two options: (a) Make a backup with `mdl backup` and restore it
locally with `mdl restore`, or (b) Use the `mdl backup --sync` flag to copy data directly
from the source environment to your local environment.

The `--sync` flag is faster and takes less data. It uses `rsync` to copy the `data` and
`src` files, meaning you don't have an archive file taking up space, and updates take
advantage of `rsync` only copying down the changed files.

For the database, the `--sync` flag still just downloads a MySQL database dump and wipes
out the current database, counting on the database being restored when the MariaDB image
first starts up, just like the backup/restore approach.

[mariadb_init_new_instance]: https://github.com/bitnami/containers/blob/main/bitnami/mariadb/README.md#initializing-a-new-instance

<script setup>
const nodeVersion = __NODE_VERSION__;
</script>
